 
GIT BLEEDING 
Upper & Lower Gastrointestinal Bleeding 
Z Medicine 
Internal Medicine Module  |  4th Year Medical Students 
 
Classification of GIT Bleeding 
❖ Upper GI Bleeding: proximal to DJ flexure (4x more common than lower GI bleeding) 
❖ Lower GI Bleeding: distal to DJ flexure 
 
Upper GI Bleeding 
Upper GI bleeding refers to bleeding from esophagus, stomach, duodenum (i.e. Proximal to ligament of 
Treitz). 
 
Causes 
• Peptic Ulcer — 44% 
• Esophagitis — 28% 
• Gastritis/erosions — 26% 
• Duodenitis — 15% 
• Varices — 13% 
• Portal hypertensive gastropathy — 7% 
• Malignancy — 5% 
• Mallory Weiss tear — 5% 
• Vascular Malformation — 3% 
• Other (e.g. Aortoenteric fistula) — rare 
Presentation 
1. Acute Upper GI bleeding presents as: 
◦ 
Hematemesis: vomiting of fresh blood or Coffee ground vomit (partially digested blood) 
◦ 
Melaena (black tarry stools PR)  — PR = Per rectal 
2. Red blood PR — If the bleeding is very brisk and severe 
3. Iron deficiency anemia — If the bleeding is very slow and occult 
 
 


Management 
1. Non-Variceal 
a) Emergency Resuscitation: 
Takes priority over determining the diagnosis/cause = more important than them = start with it. 
✓ ABC (focus on 'C') 
✓ Oxygen: 15L Non-rebreath mask 
✓ 2 large bore cannulae into both ante-cubital fossae 
✓ Take bloods at same time for CBC, Urea & Electrolytes, liver function tests, Clotting, cross match 6 
Units 
✓ Catheterise 
✓ IV fluids initially then blood as soon as available (depending on urgency: O- or Group specific or fully 
cross-matched) 
✓ Monitor response to resuscitation frequently (HR, BP, urine output, level of consciousness, peripheral 
temperature, Capillary refilling time) 
✓ Stop anti-coagulants and correct any clotting derangement 
✓ NG tube and aspiration (will help differentiate upper from lower GI bleed) 
✓ Organise definitive treatment (endoscopic/radiological/surgical) 
 
b) Endoscopy: 
• Urgent OGD — oesophageal gastro-duodenal endoscopy (within 24hrs) — diagnostic and therapeutic 
• Treatment administered if active bleeding, visible vessel, adherent blood clot 
• Treatment options include injection (adrenaline), coagulation, clipping 
• If re-bleeds then arrange urgent repeat OGD 
 
c) Pharmacology: 
• PPI (infusion) — pH >6 stabilises clots and reduces risk of re-bleeding following endoscopic 
haemostasis 
• Tranexamic acid (anti-fibrinolytic) — maybe of benefit (more studies needed) 
• If H. pylori positive then for eradication therapy 
• Stop NSAIDs/aspirin/clopidogrel/warfarin/steroids if safe to do so (risk:benefit) 
e) Surgery: 
• Reserved for patients with failed medical management (ongoing bleeding despite 2x OGD) 
• Nature of operation depends on cause of bleeding (most commonly performed in context of bleeding 
peptic ulcer: (DU > GU) 
◦ 
Bleeding DU: Under-running of ulcer 
◦ 
Bleeding GU: Wedge excision of bleeding lesion 
◦ 
Malignancy: Partial/total gastrectomy 
 
 
 


2. Variceal Bleeding 
Suspect if upper GI bleed in patient with history of chronic liver disease/cirrhosis or 
stigmata on clinical examination. 
Liver Cirrhosis results in portal hypertension and development of porto-systemic anastamosis (opening or 
dilatation of pre-existing vascular channels connecting portal and systemic circulations). 
Sites of porto-systemic anastamosis include: 
• Oesophagus (P = oesophageal branch of L gastric v, S = oesophageal branch of azygous v) 
• Umbilicus (P = para-umbilical v, S = inferior epigastric v) 
• Retroperitoneal (P = right/middle/left colic v, S = renal/supra-renal/gonadal v) 
• Rectal (P = superior rectal v, S = middle/inferior rectal v) 
Furthermore, clotting derangement in those with chronic liver disease can worsen bleeding. 
 
Management: 
a) Emergency resuscitation as already described 
b) Drugs: 
✓ Somatostatin/octreotide — vasoconstricts splanchnic circulation and reduces pressure in portal system 
✓ Terlipressin — vasoconstricts splanchnic circulation and reduces pressure in portal system 
✓ Glypressine 
✓ Propanolol — used only in context of primary prevention (in those found to have varices to reduce risk 
of first bleed) 
c)Endoscopy: 
✓ Band ligation 
✓ Injection sclerotherapy 
✓ Balloon tamponade — Sengstaken-Blakemore tube: 
◦ 
Rarely used now and usually only as temporary measure if failed endoscopic management 
 
e) Radiological procedure — used if failed medical/endoscopic management: 
✓ Selective catheterisation and embolisation of vessels feeding the varices 
✓ TIPSS procedure: Transjugular Intrahepatic Porto-Systemic Shunt 
◦ 
Shunt between hepatic vein and portal vein branch to reduce portal pressure and bleeding from 
varices — performed if failed medical and endoscopic management 
◦ 
Can worsen hepatic encephalopathy 
f) Surgical: 
• Surgical porto-systemic shunts (often spleno-renal) 
• Liver transplantation (patients often given TIPSS/surgical shunt whilst awaiting this) 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Prognosis closely related to severity of underlying chronic liver disease (Child-Pugh grading). 
Child-Pugh classification grades severity of liver disease into A, B, C based on degree of ascites,  
encephalopathy, bilirubin, albumin, INR. 
 
Mortality: 32% Child's A  |  46% Child's B  |  79% Child's C 
 
 
Rockall Score  
 
Identifies patients at risk of adverse outcome following acute upper GI bleeding  
Score <3 carries good prognosis  
Score >8 carries high risk of mortality 
 
 
 


Lower GI Bleeding 
Bleeding arising distal to the ligament of Treitz (DJ flexure). The vast majority of lower GI bleeding arises from 
(colon, rectum, anus). 
Although this includes jejunum and ileum but bleeding from these sites is rare (<5%). 
 
Causes 
 
Colon 
Rectum 
Anus 
Diverticular Disease 
Polyps 
Haemorrhoids 
Polyps 
Malignancy 
Fissure 
Malignancy 
Proctitis 
Malignancy 
Colitis 
 
 
Angiodysplasia 
 
 
Presentation 
Lower GI bleeding presents as: 
➢ Dark red blood PR — suggests more proximal bleeding point (e.g. Distal small bowel, colon) 
➢ Bright red blood PR — suggests more distal bleeding point (e.g. rectum, anus) 
PR blood may be: 
➢ Mixed or separate from the stool 
➢ If separate from the stool it may be noticed in the toilet water or on wiping 
➢ Passed with motion or alone 
➢ If blood mixed with stool — suggests more proximal bleeding 
 
iron deficiency anemia If bleeding very slow and occult. 
 
Management 
Emergency resuscitation as already described 
Pharmacological: 
• Stop NSAIDs/anti-platelets/anti-coagulants if safe 
• Tranexamic acid 
Endoscopic: 
• OGD (15% of patients with severe acute PR bleeding will have an upper GI source!) 
• Colonoscopy — diagnostic and therapeutic (injection, diathermy, clipping) 
 
 
Radiological: 
• CT angiogram — diagnostic only (non-invasive); Determines site and cause of bleeding 


• Mesenteric Angiogram — diagnostic and therapeutic (but invasive); Determines site of bleeding and 
allows embolisation of bleeding vessel; Can result in colonic ischaemia 
• Nuclear Scintigraphy — technetium labelled red blood cells: diagnostic only; Determines site of 
bleeding only (not the cause) 
 
Surgical — Last resort in management as very difficult to determine bleeding point at laparotomy: 
• Segmental colectomy — where site of bleeding is known 
• Subtotal colectomy — where site of bleeding unclear 
Beware of small bowel bleeding — always embarrassing when bleeding continues after large bowel 
removed. 
 
As 85% of lower GI bleeds will settle spontaneously, the interventions mentioned are reserved for 
severe/life-threatening bleeds.  
In the 85% where bleeding settles spontaneously, OPD investigation is required to determine 
underlying cause:  
• Endoscopy: flexible sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy 
• Barium enema 
 
 
 


Upper & Lower GI Bleeding — General Approach 
Estimation of degree of Blood Loss: 
 
 
❖ Aim of history and examination is: 
✓ Identify likely source — upper vs lower — and the potential cause 
✓ Determine severity of bleeding 
✓ Identify precipitants (e.g. Drugs) 
 
History 
History of Present Complaint (Bleeding) 
✓ Duration, frequency, and volume of bleeding (to indicate severity of bleeding) 
✓ Nature of bleeding: will point to source 
o Haematemesis (fresh or coffee ground) / Melaena (black!) — suggest upper GI bleed 
o (Note: a very brisk upper GI bleed can present with dark or bright red blood PR) 
o PR Dark red blood — suggests colon 
o PR Bright red blood — suggests rectum, anus 
✓ If PR bleeding, is blood being passed alone or with bowel opening (if alone suggests heavier bleeding) 
✓ If with bowel opening — is blood mixed with the stool? (colonic), coating the stool? (colonic/rectal), in the toilet 
water or on wiping (anal) 
✓ Ask about associated upper or lower GI symptoms that may point to the underlying cause: 
o E.g. Upper abdominal pain/dyspeptic symptoms suggest upper GI cause such as peptic ulcer 
o E.g. Lower abdominal pain, bowel symptoms such as diarrhoea or a background of change in bowel 
habit suggest lower GI cause e.g. Colitis, cancer colon 
✓ Previous episodes of bleeding and cause 
 
 
Past Medical History 


✓ History of any diseases that can result in GI bleeding, e.g. Peptic ulcer disease, diverticular disease, liver 
disease/cirrhosis 
✓ Bleeding disorders e.g. Hemophilia 
 
Drug History 
✓ Anti-platelets or anti-coagulants can exacerbate bleeding 
✓ NSAIDs and steroids may point to PUD 
 
Special Habits 
✓ Alcoholics at risk of liver disease and possible variceal bleeding as a result 
✓ Smokers at risk of peptic ulcer disease 
 
Examination 
✓ Reduced level of consciousness 
✓ Pale and clammy 
✓ Cool peripheries 
✓ Reduced CRT (Capillary refilling time) 
✓ Tachycardic and thready pulse 
✓ Hypotensive with narrow pulse pressure 
✓ Tenderness on abdominal examination may point to underlying cause e.g. Epigastric tenderness >>> peptic ulcer 
✓ Stigmata of chronic liver disease (palmar erythema, leukonychia, Dupuytren's contracture, liver flap, jaundice, 
spider naevi, gynaecomastia, shifting dullness/ascites) 
✓ Digital rectal examination may reveal melaena, dark red blood, bright red stool 
 


