Mesentric ischemia
Ä Definition:
Ø Acute mesenteric ischemia (AMI) is a syndrome caused by inadequate blood flow through the
mesenteric vessels, resulting in ischemia and eventual gangreneof the bowel wall.
Ø
Chronic mesenteric ischemia is a condition in which plaque builds up in the major arteries including
the celiac and superior mesenteric arteries that supply blood to the small intestine or small bowel.
Acute mesentric ischemia
Arterial
Venous
Occlusive
Non occlusive
Thrombotic
Embolic
Thrombotic only
Ä Acute mesenteric ischemia may be classified:
Arterial
Venous.
Ä AMI as arterial disease may be subdivided into:
Nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia
Occlusive mesenteric arterial ischemia.
Ä Occlusive mesenteric arterial ischemia subdivided into:
Acute mesenteric arterial embolism (AMAE)
Acute mesenteric arterial thrombosis (AMAT).
Ä AMI as venous disease takes the form of mesenteric venous thrombosis (MVT).
Ä Practically AMI is classified into:
1st Nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia
2ndAcute mesenteric arterial embolism (AMAE)
3rd Acute mesenteric arterial thrombosis (AMAT)
4th mesenteric venous thrombosis (MV)
Ä Pathophysiolog
Þ Insufficient blood perfusion of the small bowel and colon. Whether the occlusion is arterial or
       venous,
Ä hemorrhagic infarction leading to perforation is the common pathologic pathway.
Þ Damage to the affected bowel portion may range from reversible ischemia to transmural infarction
with necrosis and perforation
Þ As the ischemia persists, the mucosal barrier becomes disrupted, and bacteria, toxins, andvaso active
substances are released into the systemic circulation.
Ä This can cause death from septic shock, cardiac failure, or multisystem organ failure before bowel
necrosis actually occurs.
Þ Bowel necrosis can occur in 8-12 hours from the onset of symptoms.
Ä Causes of acute mesentric ischemia (Arterial)
Arterial embolism
Arteria thrombosis
Non occlusive
Mural thrombi after MI
Pre-existing visceral
atherosclerosis.
It's precipitated by severe
reduction in mesenteric perfusion,
with secondary arterial spasm
from such causes
as cardiac failure, septic shock,
hypovolemia.
Mitral stenosis, AF
Arterial aneurysm dissection
Potent vasopressors in critically ill
patients.
Vegitative endocarditis (septic
embolus)
Trauma , IBD
Vasoactive drugs as cocaine
On top of atheromatus plaque
Thromboangiitis obliterans.
Ä


Ä Causes of Mesenteric venous thrombosis
1.
Hypercoagulability.
2.
Tumor causing venous compression or hypercoagulability (paraneoplastic syndrome).
3.
Infection, usually intra-abdominal.
4.
Venous congestion from cirrhosis (portal hypertension).
5.
Increased intra-abdominal pressure from pneumoperitoneum during laparoscopic surgery.
6.
Pancreatitis
Ä Clinical presentation:
Ä
AMAE
1) abdominal apoplexy  “bowel attack"  in
 abrupt and painful presentation as a consequence of the rapid onset of occlusion and the inability to
form additional collateral circulation.
2) Often, vomiting and diarrhea (gut emptying) are observed
Ä AMAT
3) severe abdominal pain
✅The pain is diffuse, and the patient may report frank blood in the stool.
✅Symptoms worsen over time.
✅These patients typically have a history of atherosclerotic disease at other sites, such as coronary
artery disease (CAD)
Ä Non occlusive arterial
4) Nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia (NOMI) occurs more frequently in
Ø
Older patients.
Ø
Patients with acute respiratory failure or severe hypotension from cardiogenic or septic shock
Ø
Patients those taking vasopressive drugs.
Ä Symptoms typically develop over several days.
prodrome consisting of malaise and vague abdominal discomfort.
They may become hypotensive and tachycardic, with loose bloody stool
Ä Mesentric venous thrombosis
Ø
Many patients have a history of one or more of risk factors for hypercoagulability
Ø
acute or subacute abdominal pain syndrome related toi nvolvement of the small intestine rather than
the colon.
Ä Physical Examination
ÄFever, hypotension, tachycardia, tachypnea, and altered mental status are observed.
Ä Early the physical signs are few and nonspecific, Tenderness is minimal to non-existent.
ÄThe abdomen may be distended.
ÄPeritoneal signs develop late, when infarction with necrosis or perforation occurs.
Ä And theTenderness becomes severe and may indicate the location of the infarcted bowel segment.
  ÄBowel sounds range from hyperactive to absent
Ä Complications:
1.
Bowel necrosis necessitating bowel resection.
2.
Sepsis and septic shock.
3.
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS).
4.
Death


Dx:
1. Laboratory Studies
Ø
Complete blood count (CBC), which may reveal leukocytosis (bandemia) or hemoconcentration
Ø
Prothrombin time (PT)
Ø
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
Ø
International normalized ratio (INR)
Ø
Chemistry studies that may show metabolic acidosis, increased amylase levels, or
   increased lactate dehydrogenase.
2. Ultrasonography and Duplex US is highly specific (92-100%), but its
sensitivity (70-89%) does not match that of angiography.
3.Plain Abdominal Radiography:
Patients demonstrated focally oedematous bowel wall (thumb printing sign) or pneumatosis intestinalis.
It's nonspecific and include ileus, small bowel obstruction, edematous or thickened
bowel walls.
4. CT and angiography:
1. Conventional Angiography: Angiography has been the standard for diagnosis and preoperative
planning.
CT findings with a specificity greater than 95% for AMI include:
Ä SMA or SMV thrombosis
Ä intestinal pneumatosis
Ä portal venous gas
Ä Lack of bowel-wall enhancement, and ischemia of other organs.
2. Abdominal CTA is considered by many to be the diagnostic test of choice if the index of suspicion for
Mesenteric venous thrombosis is high.
5.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and MRA:
Ä  yield findings similar to those of CT in AMI.
Ä MRA has a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 91%.
Ä It is particularly effective for evaluating MVT
6. Investigations to detect causes
Ä Echocardiography may confirm the source of embolization or show valvular pathology.
Ä ECG may show myocardial infarction or atrial fibrillation.
Ä Thrombophilia screen
Ä Treatment
1. Initial Resuscitation and Stabilization.
2.(Add mesentric b4 acute)
Acute arterial embolism
Acute arterial thrombosis
Non occlusive ischemia
Acute venous
thrombosis(AMVT)
Papaverine infusion
Surgical embolectomy
Intra arterial thrombolysis
Papaverine infusion
Arterial reconstruction
(bypass)
Papaverine infusion
Anticoagulation with
heparin or warfarin,
either alone or in
combination with surgery.
3.All cases of mesenteric ischemia with signs of peritonitis or possible bowel infarction,regardless of
etiology, generally warrant immediate surgical intervention for the resection of ischemic or necrotic
intestines


Choronic mesentric ischemia
Ä Definition: CB4
Ä
Ä Causes and risk factors:
Ä Atherosclerosis
  Ä        Age, older than age 60.
  Ä        Smoking.
  Ä        High cholesterol levels.
  Ä        Diabetes
Ä Symptoms
✅Severe abdominal pain, 15 to 60 minutes after eating and lasting up to 90 minutes.
✅Weight loss.
✅Nausea.
✅Vomiting.
✅Pain that is recurrent and consistently related to food intake.
✅Fear of food due to chronic pain.
✅Flatulence.
✅Constipation
Ä Investigations:
Ø Mesenteric duplex ultrasound.
Ø Computed tomographic (CT) angiography.
Ø Angiogram .
Ä Treatment:
✅
Angioplasty and stenting.
✅
Bypass surgery.
✅
Lifestyle changes
✅
Decreasing the risk of atherosclerosis.
✅
Quitting smoking.
✅
Controlling blood sugars in people with diabetes.
✅
Lowering cholesterol levels.
✅
Lowering high blood pressure.
✅
Taking anti-platelet medications, such as aspirin and clopidogrel (Plavix).
MCQs
Q1. Non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia is more frequently seen in:
A. Young male
B. Young female
C. Diabetes mellitus
D. Critically ill patient
E. Intravenous drug abuser
Q2. In acute mesenteric ischemia, the most specific sign on abdominal X-ray is:
A. Colonic distention
B. Air under diaphragm
C. Multiple air-fluid levels
D. Thumbprinting


Q3. The most common symptom of chronic mesenteric ischemia is:
A. Vomiting
B. Constipation
C. Melena
D. Rectal bleeding
E. Postprandial abdominal pain
Q4. A 47-year-old man with atrial fibrillation presents with sudden onset abdominal pain not
related to specific physical examination . Serum lactate is elevated. CT angiography shows an
abrupt cutoff of the superior mesenteric artery. What is the most likely mechanism?
A. Acute mesenteric thrombosis
B. Acute mesenteric embolism
C. Mesenteric venous thrombosis
D. Non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia
Q5. A 68-year-old woman with severe peripheral vascular disease reports postprandial
abdominal pain for 6 months with weight loss. CT angiography shows high-grade stenosis ofthe
celiac and superior mesenteric arteries. What is the underlying pathophysiology?
A. Autoimmune vasculitis
B. Vasospastic ischemia
C. Mesenteric venous congestion
D. Chronic atherosclerosis with arterial insufficiency
E. Acute embolic obstruction
Q6. A 54-year-old woman with a factor gene mutation presents with abdominal pain. CT
angiography shows a thrombus in the superior mesenteric vein with bowel edema . What is the
most initial management of this patient ?
A. Laparotomy
B. Intra-arterial vasodilator
C. Systemic anticoagulation
D. Thrombolysis
E. Antibiotic
Q7. In a patient with suspected acute mesenteric ischemia, CT angiography shows
pneumatosis intestinalis and portal venous gas. These findings mostly indicate:
A. Early reversible ischemia
B. Mechanical obstruction
C. Advanced bowel infarction
D. Mesenteric venous congestion
E. Functional ileus
Q8. A 72-year-old man presents with severe abdominal pain and tenderness on examination,
leukocytosis, and metabolic acidosis. What best explains these symptoms?
A. Ischemia
B. Retroperitoneal perforation
C. Early bowel obstruction
D. Localized peritonitis
E. Functional abdominal pain


