Vascular diseases of liver
 Collection of rare conditions, each affecting <5/10,000 patients
– Represent an important worldwide health problem
 Non-cirrhotic portal hypertension is a common characteristic of many VDL
– Results in high morbidity and mortality
 Enemurate VDL:
✅Splanchnic vein thrombosis.
✅Budd–Chiari syndrome.
✅Acute portal vein thrombosis.
✅Extrahepatic portal vein obstruction
✅Idiopathic non-cirrhotic portal hypertension
✅Hepatic vascular malformations in hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
✅Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
✅portal vein obstruction
 Splanchnic venous thrombosis in patient without liver disease
Splanchnic vein thrombosis includes:
– Budd−Chiari syndrome (thrombosis of the hepatic venous system)
– Portal vein thrombosis
 Both conditions are caused by uncommon pro-thrombotic disorders
– Myeloproliferative neoplasms are the leading cause
– Thrombophilia
– Other local and systemic factors
 Aetiology of BCS and PVT is often multifactorial.
 Risk factors in BCS, PVT:
✅Thrombophilia: Inherited ,  Acquired
✅Myeloproliferative neoplasm : JAK2V617F positive
✅Hormonal factors: Oral contraceptives ,Pregnancy
✅PNH
✅Other systemic factors
✅Local factors
 Budd ciari syndrome
BCS is defined by the obstruction of hepatic venous outflow
Primary BCS: caused by thrombosis
Western countries: pure hepatic vein thrombosis is the most common
Asia: pure IVC or combined IVC/hepatic vein block predominates
Secondary BCS: other causes, such as malignant invasion
 Pathophysiological consequences of obstruction include:
– Sinusoidal congestion
– Liver ischaemia
– Hepatocellular necrosis
 Diagnosis requires unequivocal radiological confirmation of hepatic venous flow obstruction
  (Colored duplex ultrasound) Of choice

Dx:
 Consider diagnosis of BCS in any symptomatic or asymptomatic patient with acute or chronic
liver disease.
 Doppler ultrasound is the first line of investigation for BCS.
 MRI and CT have to be used for diagnostic confirmation.
 Re-evaluate the patient with an expert radiologist in patients with negative imaging studies but
a high suspicion of BCS.
 Refer patients with BCS to expert centres
 Stepwise treatment:
1st
Medical treatment
2nd
Angioplasty/stenting/thrombolysis
3rd
TIPS
4th
Liver transplant
1.) Medical treatment:
 Patients should receive anticoagulation (LMWH = Clexan) as soon as possible     for an
indefinite period then malivan
 adjust INR at 2 - 3
 Treatment of underlying cause (e.g. MPNs)should be logically initiated.
 pregnancy: LMHH only no warfarine
Acute portal vein thrombosis:
Recent thrombus formation within the portal vein and/or right or left branches
– Thrombus may extend into the mesenteric or splenic veins
• occurring in the absence of malignancy or cirrhosis.
Duplex ultrasound as 1st line then CT to confirm the dx
Treatment: anti-coagulation( LMWH) 
 AIM: Recanalization.
 follow up by CT angiography.
Extrahepatic portal vein obstruction
Causes:
– Malignant invasion
– Portal vein narrowing due to a malignant tumour
– Thrombosis
 Following acute thrombosis in the absence of recanalization
 Portal venous lumen obliterates
 Porto-portal collaterals develop
 Portal cavernoma after 2 months
 EHPVO should be considered in patients with features of portal hypertension or hypersplenism
 Essential features are:
– Absence of visible lumen corresponding to the portal vein
– Presence of numerous serpiginous vascular channels in porta hepatis
 Consider screening for EHPVO in patients with myeloproliferative disease and antiphospholipid
. syndrome
Use Doppler ultrasound as first-line investigation , CT for confirmation and further evaluation.
 Treatment: Anti coagulations.

Idiopathic non-cirrhotic portal hypertension (INCPH) ; Hepatic vascular malformations.(Reading
only if you want.
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
Characterized morphologically by loss of sinusoidal wall integrity
Well-established complication of myeloablative regimens in HSCT
Associated with a large number of drugs and toxins
Actinomycin D
Azathioprine
mitomycine
Cyclophosphamide
6-thioguanine
Terbinafine
6-mercaptopurine
Post-bone marrow transplant
Total-body irradiation
Hepatic irradiation (high doses)
Platelet transfusion containing ABO-incompatible plasma
Signs and symptoms include
– Weight gain, tender hepatomegaly and jaundice
Dx: Liver biopsy

