Diverticulosis
Diverticulosis occurs when small, bulging pouches (diverticula) develop in the digestive tract.
It arises at the weak points of the wall (entery of blood vessele).
✅Diverticulosis: presence of pouch
✅Diverticular disease: pouch + symptoms
✅Diverticulitis: inflammation of the pouch
Epidemology:
 Overall prevalence : 12% to 49%
 It  Increases with age
 Less than 10% in those younger than 40 years
 50% to 66% of patients 80 years
 As common in men and women
Þ Men - higher incidence of diverticular bleeding
Þ Women - more episodes of obstruction or stricture
It's a Disease of Western civilization
Extraordinarily rare in rural Africa and Asia
Highest prevalence rates in united States, Europe, and Australia
Increase with urbanization
Factors That Influence the Risk for Diverticulosis
Increased Risk
Decreased Risk
Dietary meat intake
High dietary fiber intake
Living in Western countries (e.g., United
States, Western Europe, Australia)
Living in predominantly rural Asian or
African countries (e.g. Kenya, Jordan,
Thailand)
Increasing age
Connective tissue diseases
Location
In Western countries- left colon
90% in sigmoid         15% have right-sided
In Asian countries- right-sided
Spectrum
Uncomplicated diverticulosis
Complicated diverticulosis
A) asymptomatic diverticulosis
A) diverticulitis:

uncomplicated diverticulitis – localized phlegmon

complicated diverticulitis – abscess, free perforation
with peritonitis, fistula, obstruction
B) symptomatic uncomplicated diverticular
disease
B) Bleeding


Diagnosis
1) Plain X-Ray : abnormal in 30% to 50%
Contrast Enema Examinations - only water- soluble contrast enemas, such as Gastrografin, should be used.
A gentle, single-contrast study should be performed and terminated once findings of diverticulitis are
discovered.
Findings : extravasated contrast material with or without the outlining of an abscess cavity, an intramural
sinus tract, or a fistula.
2) CT scan:
The Diagnostic procedure of choice for acute diverticulitis because diverticulitis is mainly an extraluminal
disease.
CT criteria for diverticulitis-
✅presence of diverticula  with pericolic infiltration of fatty tissue (often appearing as fat stranding).
✅thickening of the colon wall
✅formation of abscesses
3) Endoscopy:
Avoided In cases of suspected acute diverticulitis (risk of perforation, either from
the instrument itself or from air insufflation)
Once the acute phase has passed (one to three months later), a colonoscopy should
be electively performed to exclude competing (other) diagnoses,  particularly
neoplasia.
Treatment
1)Uncomplicated diverticulosis
Outpatient treatment
Hospitalisation
Mild symptoms
Elderly
No peritoneal signs
Immunocompromised
Able to take oral fluids
Severe comorbidities
Supportive home netword
High fever, significant leukocytosis
Treatment:
✅Clear liquid diet and antibiotics covering
aerobic and anaerobic organisms (E.coli,
streptococci, Bacteroids fragilis).
Treatment:
✅Bowel rest
✅IV fluids
✅Broad spectrum antibiotics
If improvement continues, patients may be  discharged, but they should complete
       a seven- to 10-day course of oral antibiotics.
Failure to improve with conservative medicaltherapy warrants a diligent search for
complications, consideration of alternative diagnoses, and surgical consultation
Remember that : Compilation are:
Abscess
Fistula occures in less than 5% of patients
Obstruction accompany diverticular disease either acutely or chronically.
Perforation


2) complicated diverticulitis
A) Abscess
Small pericolic abscess
Non responding cases
✅Noninterventional management- with broad
spectrum antibiotics and bowel rest
Continued only in stable patients who
demonstrate improvements in pain, fever,
tenderness, and leukocytosis over the first
few days of therapy.
✅Single operation (resection with primary
anastomosis) have become the preferred surgical
approaches
✅Percutaneous catheter drainage:
CT-guided percutaneous drainage abdominal
abscesses.
Often eliminates the need for a multiple-
stage  surgical procedure with colostomy.
✅Two-stage management - Hartmann procedure
Surgical emergency requires urgent
operative intervention
B) Fistula:
✅Single-stage operative resection with fistula closure and primary anastomosis could be
performed in 75% of patients
C) Diverticular hemorrhage
Resuscitation
If bleeding is massive or if the patient remains unstable after attempted resuscitation, early
angiography is done to localize the site of bleeding
surgical consultation should be obtained
Bowel preparation and colonoscopy
If diverticula are found but bleeding has stopped and no other colonic causes are
found, the patient should be instructed to avoid NSAIDs and anticoagulants, if
possible,most patients dont re-bleed.
If active bleeding is detected:
epinephrine injection alone or in combination with other therapies such as heater probe
coagulation, bipolar coagulation endoclips,fibrin sealant,and band ligation.
Directed therapy with angiography or segmental surgical resection:
Facilitated by endoscopic localization of bleeding.
When active bleeding is present but colonoscopy fails to allow localization or treatment of
a bleeding source, further evaluation with nuclear scintigraphy (tagged red blood cell scan)
or angiography can be undertaken.
Surgery for lower intestinal bleeding usually is avoided unless
endoscopic or angiographic therapies are unavailable or fail.


Diverticular Hemorrhage
Most common identifiable cause of significant lower gastrointestinal bleeding(30% to 40%
of cases).
Pathology:
✅Intimal thickening and medial thinning of the vasa recta as it coursed over the dome of the
diverticulum.
✅Segmental weakening of the artery, thus predisposing to its rupture.
✅ Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been implicated in lower intestinal,
and specifically diverticular, bleeding.
Clinical features
✅Abrupt, painless hematochezia
✅Arterial source , the volume of blood usually is moderate or large
✅Patients often pass red or maroon clots; melena is unusual
✅Neither a positive fecal occult blood test nor iron deficiency anemia should be attributed to
diverticular  hemorrhage
✅Bleeding ceases(stop)  spontaneously in 70% to 80% of patients
✅Rebleeding rates range from
22% to 38%.
Management: CB4
ﺍﺫﻛﺮﻧﻲ
ﻓﻲ
ﺩﻋﺎﺋﻚ
ﺭﺟﺎﺀﺍ


