dysphagia

> [Slide Snapshot OCR]:
dysphagia

---


> [Image OCR]: Stricture ——" })
in esophagus

ure 9. A, Esophageal stricture showing obstruction of food bolus; B, barium swallow.

---

DYSPHAGIA
  Definition 
Dysphagia is defined as having difficulty in swallowing which may affect any part of the swallowing pathway from the mouth to the stomach.
Approximately half of the dysphagia patients are seen in ENT clinics.

---

History and Examination 
Patients complain that foods or liquids are no longer being swallowed easily and there is a sensation of food sticking.
Clinician must try to distinguish oropharyngeal from oesophageal dysphagia

---

Oropharyngeal vs.Oesophageal Dysphagia  
In Oropharyngeal dysphagia, there is difficulty in preparing and transporting the food bolus through the oral cavity as well as initiating the swallow. This may be associated with aspiration or nasopharyngeal regurgitation.
In Oesophageal dysphagia, patients complain of food sticking in their lower throat, neck, retro-sternal discomfort or epigastrium.

---

Age: Possible causes 
Children : Foreign body or congenital malformation
Middle aged patients: Reflux oesophagitis, hiatus hernia, anaemia, achlasia, globus syndrome.
Elderly patients: Malignancy, stricture formation from longstanding reflux, pharyngeal pouch, motility disorders associated with aging and neurological disorders.

---

History 
Onset.
Duration
Progression
Severity of symptoms
Types of food intake that causes problems
Alleviating factors

---

Associated Symptoms 
Regurgitation
Pain on swallowing
Hoarseness of voice
Otalgia
Coughing after eating
Frequent chest infections

---

Clinical Examination 
Complete Head and neck examination
Inspection of oral cavity
Dentition
Oropharynx
IDL
Nasolaryngoscopy
Cranial nerve examination ( tongue, gag and cough reflex, hoarseness, vocal cord mobility)
Neck for lymph nodes, neck masses, thyroid enlargement, loss of laryngeal crepitus and integrity of laryngeal cartilages.

---

Special Investigations 
Blood tests to exclude anaemia (? Cause or effect)
ESR or C-Reactive Protein raised in malignancy or chronic inflammatory process
LFT, RFT along with S. Calcium when nutrition is impaired or metastasis is suspected
Thyroid function tests if dysphagia is caused by goiter or malignancy of thyroid

---

Special Investigations 
Barium swallow
Chest radiograph
CT  scan examination of neck, chest and abdomen.
MRI is indicated when there are neurological causes such as multiple sclerosis, cerebral tx, nasopharyngeal ca.
Rigid endoscopy
Flexible endoscopy
Manometry

---


> [Image OCR]: Esophagus =

ee |

Figure 12. A, Diffuse esophageal spasm; B, barium swallow x-ray.

---


> [Image OCR]: Esophageal diverticulum; B, barium swallow x-ray; C, endoscopic view

annel that results from a structural abnormality, as opposed to a motor dis
ecifically refers to a narrowing that results from a thickening of the wall of
w the lumen. Stenosis tends to cause more difficulty in swallowing solids tl
ence among the different types of stenotic lesions is the rate of progressic

e band protruding into the lumen. These rings or webs are typically compa
al or acquired, and may occur anywhere in the pharynx or esophagus. The
ion of the esophagus and stomach. Named for the radiologist who descrit
el by about 50%. A ring-like band located elsewhere in the pharynx or esc
pically cause intermittent dysphagia for solids, which may remain stable

Schatzki's ring; B, barium swallow x-ray; C, endoscopic

gia of sudden onset, separated by symptom-free periods (without swallow

‘icular problems with foods generally considered to be soft, such as pasta
2d a limited choice of foods (e.g., when dining out), or is distracted by con

nost common cause of inflammatory strictures. Inflammation resulting frorr
1ageal wall narrows the channel, producing the dysphagia for solids chara
; or webs (Figure 18). Unless the cause of inflammation has been remover

Esophagus WAR — Exosions

---


> [Image OCR]: ure 10. A, Zenker’s diverticulum; B, esophageal diverticulum.

---


> [Image OCR]: Pharyngeal
muscles:

Middle
constrictor One
muscle

\ Inferior
constrictor
muscle

~Zenker's
Trachea

Esophagus

}5. A, Zenker's diverticulum; B, barium x-ray study.

---

Causes: Congenital  
Choanal Atresia
Cleft lip and palate
Unilateral vocal cord paralysis
Laryngeal cleft
Tracheo-oesphageal fistula
Oesophageal atresia
Vascular rings

---

Acquired: Traumatic 
Accidental and iatrogenic
Blunt trauma, penetrating injuries and compression effects
Direct damage and injury to cranial nerves
Head injury                                             Acquired: Infections 
Acute pharyngitis, tonsillitis, quinsy
Glandular fever
Acute supraglottitis
Herpetic, fungal and CMV mucosal lesions
Candidiasis
Tuberculosis
Submandibular, parapharyngeal and retropharyngeal abscesses

---

Acquired: Inflammatory 
GERD with or without stricture formation
Patterson Brown-Kelly syndrome
Autoimmune disorders like scleroderma, Sjogrens disease, rheumatoid arthritis
  Acquired: Oesophageal motility disorders 
Achlasia
Diffuse oesophageal spasm
Nutcracker oesophagus

---

Acquired: Neoplastic 
Benign and malignant tumors of oral cavity, pharynx and oesophagus
Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma
Skull base tumors
Leukemia and lymphomas
Enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes

---

Acquired: Neurological 
CVA (Stroke)
Isolated recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy
Parkinson's disease
Myasthenia gravis
Multiple sclerosis
Motor- neuron disease

---

Acquired: Drug Induced 
Drugs causing oesophagitis
Swallowing tablets with insufficient water or just before going to bed can cause oesophagitis
Oesophagus at the level of aortic arch most vulnerable to contact by acid producing drugs (with pH less than 3) such as tetracyclines, doxycycline, vitamin C and ferrous sulphate

---

Acquired: Drug Induced (2) 
Broad-spectrum antibiotics and chemotherapeutic agents may cause secondary viral ulceration or fungal infections
Stevens-Johnson syndrome is a more serious complications of antibiotic therapy with an acute erosive pharyngitis/ oesophagitis as well as delayed oesophageal strictures
Inhibitory drug side effects by anticholinergics, tricyclic antidepressants and calcium channel blockers

---

Acquired: Drug Induced (3) 
Excitatory side effects of drugs like cisapride and metaclopramide.
Dysphagia can be a complication of drugs like antihypertensives, ACE Inhibitors, anticholinergics, antiemetics, antihistamines, diuretics, and opiates by causing xerostomia

---

Miscellaneous  
Presbydysphagia
Foreign bodies
Caustic strictures
Pharyngeal pouch
Patients with tracheostomy

---

Key Points 
Age suggests most likely cause of dysphagia
Globus pharyngeus rarely associated with any serious disease
Dysphagia of short duration in elderly patient who smoke or drink and which progress from solids to liquids is a classic case of malignancy
Referred otalgia with dysphagia is a sinister symptom and poor prognostic sign

---

Key Points (2) 
Neurological causes of dysphagia mostly affect orpharyngeal phase
Ingested foreign bodies tend to lodge at sites of constriction
Barium study is contraindicated in patients with suspected perforation of oesophagus

---

Motility Disorders 
These conditions include:
Achlasia
Scleroderma
Diffuse Esophageal Spasm
Nutcracker Esophagus
Up to 30% pts with diagnosis of MI will be found to have an esophageal cause of pain and motility disorders account for over 50% of these patients.
Mainstay of investigation is manometry , endoscopy, barium studies

---

Achlasia 
Failure of relaxation of LES during swallowing due to degeneration of myenteric plexus.
Presentation long standing dysphagia and regurgitation
Barium swallow: Dilated esophagus with a smooth tapering stricture at its lower end
Esophageal manometry: Synchronous contractions and failure to relax
24 Hour pH measurement: Confirms reflux

---


> [Image OCR]: Dilated
esophageal
tumen

Esophago-
gastric
junction (EG)

Lumen (EG)

Scope view

|. A, Anatomic findings in achalasia; B, endoscopic image; B, radiographic image.

---


> [Image OCR]: 308M 2PM GPM 10PM 2M 6H

2 26. A, pH monitor placement. Inset shows the catheter position in the esophagus;
yr tracing; C, abnormal continuous pH monitor tracing.

---


> [Image OCR]: A 8 c
\

savary | \
Jilator..
: suplaced

over
-sophageal Buidewire Larger
tricture dilators.

may be

Dilator
inserted, ‘
expanding N
Stricture

2 27. Endoscopic dilation, Technique for Savary dilation of an esophageal stricture

\ B c
Maloney
dilator...
MJ \
ilat \ inserted, e
=m expanding
a stricture
sophageal
rt \
Larger
\ dilators
\ may be
\ inserted

@ 28. Endoscopic dilation. Technique for Maloney dilation of an esophageal stricture

---


> [Image OCR]: XN

lation expending
a stricture

ophageal || \

ricture

Larger

dilators
may be
inserted

28. Endoscopic dilation. Technique for Maloney dilation of an esophageal stricture

hy ce oi}
Scope \
\
y
. 9 pit 11s
(balloon) catheter
catheter inserted
\ 1 into stricture... WW balloon
ted =e Esophageal soon
phagus stricture inflated... \

\

29. Endoscopic dilation. Technique for through-the-scope (TTS) dilation of an esor
e

of large diameter balloon dilators has been used for decades to weaken th
ageal sphincter has been successful in patients with isolated upper esoph

‘ so impaired that they are unable to take adequate nutrition safely by mc
teral feeding, most often provided by an endoscopically placed gastroston
iration. At the same time, measures are taken to correct the swallowing pr

ny patient who has lost substantial amounts of weight or has had recurrent
ates that the problem can be substantially improved in a short period of tin
ime to explain that malnutrition and excessively prolonged meals have as
y tube does not prevent further efforts to treat the swallowing problem anc

---


> [Image OCR]: eurotoxin botulinum toxin has been successfully used in patients with ach
nd has earned a place in the management of patients considered poor car
yeal sphincter causing a chemical denervation of the sphincter. Twenty to
‘with a sclerotherapy needle passed through the endoscope (Figure 35). /
d duration of effect, lasting on average one year. Repeat treatment is nece
een reports of skin rashes noted after treatment.

ne

Dilated
esophagus Injection site
(squamo-columnar,
junction)
Needle injects

botulinum toxin
into lower esophageal
sphincter (stricture)

u
bY

schnique for intrasphincteric injection of botulinum toxin for achalasia.

scopic or a thorascoscopic technique has significantly decreased the morb
nodified Heller myotomy is typically the surgical procedure performed. A Ic
igh to result in gastroesophageal reflux. In many cases, an antireflux proc

A \_ Esophageal B
dilation’
Myotomy, pear
1ucOs:
incision throug!
\ myoton

Lower ™

esophageal
sphineter Stomech

urgical technique for single anterior lateral myotomy.

---

Achlasia-Treatment 
Sequential dilatation of Lower Oesophageal Sphincter with intraluminal balloons under fluoroscopic control
Balloon myotomy is safe, effective in 3/4th cases and can be repeated
Surgical myotomy (Open/laparoscopic) reserved for failed balloon failures
Failed myotomy can be treated with balloon dilatation

---

DES & Nutcracker Esophagus 
Characterized by severe chest pain and dysphagia
Primarily involvement of lower 1/3, muscle hypertrophy and high pressure contractions
Symptoms intermittent so ambulatory manometry is required
Treat with calcium channel blockers or balloon dilatation
Results disappointing

---

Esophageal Carcinoma 
EC is increasing in faster in incidence than any other malignancy in developed world with a ten fold rise in the last 20 years
This increase is not squamous cell carcinoma but in the incidence of adenocarcinoma
Classification of AC
Type 1: Lower 1/3 of esophagus
Type 2: At oesophago-gastric junction
Type 3: In gastric cardia with 5cm of  GE Junction
Related to damaging effects of GE Reflux.
H pylori eradication distal vs. proximal disease

---


> [Image OCR]: \, esophageal cancer; B, barium swallow x-ray; C, endoscopic view.

---

Risk factors 
Older age 
Caucasian race 
Male gender 
GERD symptoms 
Obesity Tobacco use 
Lower esophageal sphincter–relaxing drugs

---

Barrett's esophagus 
A well-recognized pre malignant condition for the development of adenocarcinoma and results from chronic gastroesophageal reflux.
It is characterized by a metaplastic transformation of the typically squamous epithelium native of the esophagus, to a columnar type highlighted by the presence of goblet cells appreciated on histologic evaluation.
The condition entails a 30- to 50-fold greater risk of developing adenocarcinoma.

---

Treatment 
Early esophageal cancers, those confined to the mucosa or upper submucosa of the esophagus, are termed T1, N0, M0. The traditional approach for these early cancers is surgical resection.
Primary surgical therapy for cancers limited to the esophagus, stage I or IIa disease, has had good results without the need for or morbidity of chemotherapy
More than 50% of those with this cancer present with stage III or IV disease. The prognosis remains dismal, with an overall 5-year survival of approximately 20%
More promising have been the results of studies combining neo adjuvant chemotherapy with radiation therapy.

---

Palliative Measures 
Despite advances in diagnosis and treatment, up to 50% of patients have incurable disease at presentation, therefore necessitating palliative measure
A variety of therapies have been employed to palliate dysphagia in patients with oesophageal carcinoma including oesophageal dilation, radiation therapy, Nd:YAG laser, thermal electrocoagulation, and sclerotherapy of the tumor.

---

Palliative Measures 
Oesophageal prostheses (stents) have also been used as a method for palliation of malignant dysphagia . Because of improved design, materials, and deployment systems, self-expandable metal stents (SEMS) have become an attractive alternative to palliate EAC.

---


---

